- yen I emphasize that you're starting
from a blank canvas I emphasize the
meaninglessness of the exercise and yet
something meaningful arises from it that
we cannot evaluate in terms of this
phony pain pleasure calculus what does
it mean to apply the pain pleasure
calculus any of these things to apply it
to thousands of hours studying Chinese
to say oh well is there more pleasure
than there is pain it's meaningless
it's it's a it's a categorical error
you're putting something in the wrong
category it's this is not like BDSM this
is not something we can look at how much
pain is caused versus how much pleasure
and come to a conclusion the merit or
value of studying Chinese is it's not
going to be quantified in this way the
merit or value of going into a
humanitarian work who for whom are you
even gonna add up the the pain and
pleasure it makes no sense part of this
delusion stems out of starting from the
deep-seated assumption that the meaning
of life is pleasure and that suffering
is something so terrible that it negates
any possible or actual meaning in life
so here's here's an example the large
parts of the universe that are
uninhabited
they aren't beings they're certainly not
sentient beings and if we think about
those uninhabited parts of the of the
universe we're not filled with an o2 I
think we should be filled with remorse
for the absent goods that they are they
so if we think about Mars for example
where they could be Martians but they
aren't we don't think gee think about
all that pleasure that those absent
Martians could have isn't that a
terrible thing we don't think that at
all whereas thinking we think about the
absence of let's say mmm give Martian
woes
just like we have wars on earth and we
think about the absence of all the
suffering there I think we said that's a
pretty good thing it's pretty good that
they don't have that day that this that
is nothing like that on Mars that's a
that's an advantage that Mars has over
but there's no one who doesn't have
those harms exactly exactly but I still
think that it's a it's a good thing that
there's the absence of that suffering on
Mars
the idea of a new miracle form of
suffering is totally unreal that's an
abstraction and it's an abstract
comparison that is profoundly misleading
in the same way that a monotheistic is
right so there are people who who say
this is I'll use a very down-to-earth
example here you can talk to Jews
Christians and Muslims who will say to
you well yes you may enjoy having sex
outside of marriage you may enjoy
fornication in the strictest biblical
sense of fornication but what you don't
realize is that this is really not very
much pleasure and it's gonna involve a
certain amount of suffering and sorrow
and agony and how can you possibly
compare that to paradise in the
afterlife
how can you compare that to what you're
passing up this imaginary afterlife this
heaven and so on that ensues for without
that much of a difference for Christians
Muslims and and Jews how can you destroy
one for the other I mean but this is
even more observed because we're not
making a comparison between earth and an
imaginary paradise we're making a
comparison between Earth and a nullity
an imaginary nonentity which is life as
it exists now on the surface of the Moon
let's spend a moment on that if I pause
it a kind of godlike paradise for all
conscious beings right so there really
is just there's nothing wrong in the
universe by any anything that you can
say is wrong you know like there's a
little ache and pain over here there's a
little dissatisfaction over here I will
just cancel that by saying no no these
those are moments where there's there's
more pleasure flooding in there and more
even deeper sense of meaning even deeper
gratification of one's intellectual life
and these are these are beings who are
far more competent than you and I are to
judge the character of their experience
they've had a billion years to consider
the matter and they're still happy to be
here imagine mine's constituted like
that why should we be indifferent to
that
and the primordial dial-tone of
non-existent see I think what's dividing
us here is the asymmetry because if you
if you think the is the asymmetry that I
am that I'm defending then you'll say
well there's nothing bad in that
hygienic life that you're speaking about
but there's also nothing bad in the
situation of non-existence so that the
day there they're equal what's going on
here invisibly for the the antenatal as'
is actually a monotheistic salvific mode
of thinking the paradise of the
antenatal lists is the moon it's the
lifeless rocks on the surface of Mars as
surreal as that may sound and they're
saying compared to that standard what we
do here on earth can never live up to it
so why paint a picture why study a
language like Chinese why do
humanitarian work when it can't compare
to this paradise they're holding up as
an after comparison but that comparison
is utterly unreal and in contrast to
that the value of this painting is
actually something very real
[Music]
Banas yen hey guys what's up this video
is going to get into some of the
profoundest questions of the meaning of
life philosophy and practice etc but it
does so jumping off from some of the
simplest and shallowest questions that
are entertained by antenatal astreus t'
youtube attention-seeking antenatal s
like in mentem somebody love I've
crossed swords with in today here on
YouTube in the past in the background
you can see and possibly here my
girlfriend Melissa who is rolling out
the dough you're making bread or
something huh babe
okay pita bread today alright we're
doing a lot of baking lately and you can
see the outline of my my robot friend as
I call it the stand mixer wheel and some
other some other kitchen equipment was
among our top priorities we first moved
into this apartment so look guys this
video began with a question from a
supporter on patreon if you want to pay
one dollar a month you can send me
questions and I'll send you replies and
if your questions or the discussion is
intelligent enough I'll make videos in
response to your question just like this
one a guy wrote in to me very very
sincerely overwrought over the ethical
and philosophical issues raised by the
ante natal list
Melissa in the background she had a
period of her life where those questions
meant a lot to her I think not these
same philosophical questions but the
questions raised by child free people
and anti-natal SP Palani Internet you
know I mean there's a reason why this is
meaningful to millions of people it
raises questions of how should we live
what does it mean to live a good life
how should we as thinking intelligent
adults resolve to spend the rest of our
day is should we or should we not be you
know resolving to spend our time raising
an infant as opposed to doing the
various positive things we can do is it
in fact net positive or net negative
is it something selfish that subtracts
from the world to decide to have your
own child or is it something positive
that as the world this is not this is
not a shallow or simple question and
something I know Melissa thought about a
great deal before she fell in love with
me and basically went baby crazy but hey
sorry I'm joking around but her position
her
this is not shallow but it is true that
when she fell in love with me she had a
period of really being baby crazy which
was interesting to see where I think
hormones and the romantic instinct
totally overwhelmed what were I think
genuinely several years of deep
meditations and reflections did you for
anyway look I got a sincere question on
patreon from a guy who was really
overwrought not just about the
anti-natal as critique as applied to
individual people getting pregnant
having babies those decisions but in the
broader ecological worldview that sort
of step one is the antenatal is arguing
that human beings do so much damage to
the world that it would be better for
the planet
in an abstract sense of human beings
didn't exist or if there were fewer and
fewer human beings ultimately leading to
the determination of the human species
on earth that's one angle to it but then
I think the the necessary kind of
ethical and intellectual corollary of
that what inevitably follows from this
this perspective is the view that all
life is similarly deeply flawed so I've
heard in mentem who's a youtuber of this
philosophical school thought stating in
almost exactly these terms he has said
that it's it's a mistake for anti-natal
ists argue that only human life is
flawed and suffering and bad it's it's a
mistake he says to think that lions are
doing it right that sharks are doing it
right and that humans are doing wrong so
the point is here if you think the human
beings with their intellect and their
neurosis and their agonizing over
ethical and philosophical choices if you
think our lives are not worth living how
much less worthwhile is the endless toil
struggle and aimless suffering of a lion
in the wilderness of a squirrel in the
forest of a shark in the ocean of a
penguin plodding around in circles on
the ice shelf of a the Arctic ax so the
same fundamental pessimism which I think
in this are in this video I'm gonna
argue very briefly or arises from a very
simple error but the fundamental
perspective or delusion that life itself
cannot be justified because of the
pleasure pain calculus that when you add
up the suffering of the life of that
penguin or the life of that lion it's so
much greater than the pleasure that
therefore it would be better if the
penguin didn't exist if the lion didn't
exist if all human life and human
endeavor didn't exist now in response to
this patreon supporter writing to me and
I say he was very sincere he talked
about his own life and what he's been
struggling with and what he's been
thinking about and this respect meanness
wasn't wasn't a kind of hypothetical
debating Club situation or something
this son has really impact his life in
his perspective um I pointed out that
the real moral judgment here is that
life on the moon is better than life on
Earth by which I mean no life at all I
said I might call this philosophy not
antinatalism and not pessimism is
medical Lu tourism because ultimately
the conclusion is that a lifeless rock
circling around the Sun is more
meaningful than a rock on which there is
life ecology forests oceans and the
suffering that comes with it that the
existence of a nervous system and
perceptual organs like eyes and ears
that are capable of suffering is
something so terrible is such a mistake
in this judgment that it's so wrong and
so bad that the universe would be a
better place it would be morally
ethically and sensually superior I say
essentially because it comes down to
sensations and bizarre sense in terms of
the the pleasure of pain calculus it
would be better if our solar system were
just a series of lifeless asteroids or
barren surfaces like the moon so this
conversation with this guy proceeded
further and it again had a positive
impact on him he mentioned that another
one of my philosophical discussions
really impacted him positively where I
talked about the difference between
perceiving the world in terms of
minimizing your ecological impact
minimizing the negative impact as
opposed to maximizing your positive
impacts which is you know a conceptual
difference now
think about your own life may not be any
actual difference what you do in your
life but it's a different way of drawing
up the calculus and then say part of
this delusion stems out of starting from
the deep-seated assumption that the
meaning of life is pleasure and that
suffering is something so terrible that
it negates any possible or actual
meaning in life that simply the
existence of suffering negates the
existence of the whole ocean that
there's no point having an ocean with
sharks and whales in it if there's gonna
be suffering if those sharks are gonna
eat fish I don't know maybe the whales
eat the shark sometimes depends on which
species of whale we're talking about etc
etc become the cycle of life is lacking
a justification because in their minds
the only justification that can exist is
of pleasure at weighing pain I think
that is a fundamentally incoherent and
nonsensical view of the universe view of
ecology view of the life of the squirrel
and the lion and in the forest and it's
especially nonsensical when it's when
it's blood human beings now starting of
course the selection of examples is
significant here and I'm gonna put
forward later here on this video an
example that doesn't flatter my case but
I start with three examples really
rapidly that do flutter in my case you
can see where I'm coming from where I'm
going uh humanitarian work painting on a
blank canvas practicing Chinese is a
language I woke up this morning I woke
up you know vote now or before my
girlfriend and I started studying
Chinese and listening to philosophy at
the same time writing out census in this
language I am NOT gonna glorify for you
I'm the last person in the world to tell
you that this is an intrinsically
meaningful use of my time the Chinese
language is in many ways shockingly
painfully meaningless and I don't lie to
myself or others that this is something
very meaningful the meaninglessness of
it is you know it keeps your teeth clean
rinse your mouth with rubbing alcohol is
of its it's brisk how meaningless it is
to wake up and study these mono
syllables and these you know symbols
that start it off with human beings
scratching into
tortoiseshell and bone and you know
trying to make little idea graphic you
know depictions of you know two hands a
hand holding the the moon and this kind
of thing so I have other videos talking
about the Chinese red language it's
produced this legacy of incredibly
complex and yet meaningless symbols that
I'm now expected to spend the next ten
years in my life doing rote memorization
for for a very uncertain outcome I mean
the ultimate outcome of that after 10
years is that I will never speak read or
write Chinese as well as a native
speaker does and what I can do with the
language of my own life may also be
meaningless etc okay so what point is
here in a Buddhist sense of the word
suffering I'm willing to see this kind
of intellectual exercise study education
self-development
as suffering and even as meaningless
suffering right and yet I still think it
is radically false to look at this and
say wow what's going on right now on the
surface of the Moon his superior that
you know this is it would be better if
life on Earth resembled life on Mars or
life on the moon the G if only we could
we could get rid of the obstruction of
all this biological and intellectual
complexity that would be better with
humanitarian work again I would not
glorify someone going and doing
humanitarian work I'm not gonna tell you
that it's inherently meaningful I'm not
gonna tell you you can even have any
reliable sense of positive outcomes if
right now you sign up to do humanitarian
work in Syria but the the real contrast
we have to make in our lives is not
between you buying an airplane ticket
going to Syria and let's say say handing
sacks of rice to starving people handing
bandages to people who need medical care
let's just say it's the most direct
right let's say you actually build a
shelter for refugees temporary camps and
this kind of things in the borderlands
of Syria you're providing material needs
for people in the most the most simple
sense it would be ridiculous and absurd
to contrast that to the surface of the
Moon or the surface of Mars and say well
look look how much more simple it is
without any of this suffering without
any of this striving with energy this
ambition to something positive
morally superior de to move to Mars or
for Earth - without human life
now there are contrasts that are
important you can do this you can sign
up and go to Syria or you can watch
basketball what was it babe they just
did the final four or something in
basketball I don't know anything about
basketball the NCAA Championships just
just happened in in basketball I've
never even heard of this crap you know I
was spending my time studying Chinese
we're actually reading Plato and
Socrates and Xenophon we're doing
meaningful things and we're baking we
keep track every day we do it many
people think it's their time the real
contrast we have to deal with in life
are not between the surface and the moon
and the surface of planet Earth but they
are contrast between the type of
meaninglessness the type of suffering
involved in devoting your time to
watching basketball as opposed to the
type of meaninglessness or the type of
suffering involved in attempting to do
something positive to humanitarian work
and again I don't glorify it you have to
watch other videos on this channel cuz
I'm gonna go into detail I'm not here
handing over the same way would be so
easy for me to hand you the delusion oh
studying the Chinese language is the
most meaningful and rewarding thing in
the world
Oh going and helping the poor and
downtrodden and homeless is the most
meaningful thing I'm not offering that
at all I do see the the suffering and
the meaninglessness and the inevitable
disappointment and probably the
ingratitude of the people you're helping
and quite possibly the end of the
humanitarian work you're left with a
sense of hollowness and defeat and
disappointment yourself and then maybe
you want to go home and become a painter
and start painting canvases about it
so look the canvas again - to paint a
picture I emphasize that you're starting
from a blank canvas I emphasize the
meaninglessness of the exercise and yet
something meaningful arises from it that
we cannot evaluate in terms of this
phony pain pleasure calculus what does
it mean to apply the pain pleasure
calculus to any of these things to apply
it to thousands of hours studying
Chinese to say oh well is there more
pleasure than there is paint it's
meaningless it's it's a it's a
categorical
you're putting something in the wrong
category it's this is not like BDSM this
is not something we can look at how much
pain is caused versus how much pleasure
and come to a conclusion the merit or
value of studying Chinese is it's not
going to be quantified in this way the
merit or value of going into a
humanitarian work who for whom are you
even going to add up the pain and
pleasure it makes no sense the
difference between having a blank canvas
and painting a canvas painting some
meaningful image on this canvas we
cannot quantify in terms of pain versus
pleasure and I point out the canvas
itself painting on a canvas is real
whereas this concept of there being a
quantifiable thing called pain and a
quantifiable thing called pleasure
the idea of a numerical form of
suffering is totally unreal that's an
abstraction and it's an abstract
comparison that is profoundly misleading
in the same way that a monotheistic arid
I says right so there are people who say
this is I'll use a very down-to-earth
example here you can talk to Jews
Christians and Muslims who will say to
you well yes you may enjoy having sex
outside of marriage you may enjoy
fornication in the strictest biblical
sense of fornication but what you don't
realize is that this is really not very
much pleasure and it's gonna involve a
certain amount of suffering and sorrow
and agony and how can you possibly
compare that to paradise in the
afterlife
how can you compare that to what you're
passing up this imaginary afterlife this
heaven and so on that ensues for without
that much of a difference for Christians
Muslims and and Jews how can you destroy
one for the other I mean but this is
even more observed because we're not
making a comparison between earth and an
imaginary paradise we're making a
comparison between Earth and a nullity
an imaginary nonentity which is life as
it exists now on the surface of the Moon
and and Mars
the canvas itself is real we think of
the arts and we think of image making
you know artifice we think of
creating an illustration as something
unreal as a mere appearance but in this
case it's interesting because that image
and what it means is something
infinitely more real than this idea
about a quantifiable form of suffering
and pain what am I gonna paint on the
canvas okay I've just been studying
Chinese and then I went to Syria and the
humanitarian work and let's say because
I know what guy who's been doing
humanitarian work over there in the
Syrian area let's say I'm also
interested in boxing I'm not but this
guy's thinking of it I think he's still
a sport when I'm patriotic I know a guy
those are his interests he's studying
languages I think he's studying Arabic
he's into boxing and he's doing
humanitarian work so let's just say he
sits down to the canvas and he puts
together those feelings and experiences
on a canvas he paints a picture and
there were elements of training to be a
boxer and there are things that related
to studying the language and there's
some kind of pastiche reflecting his
aspirations to help people into a
humanitarian work and his disappointment
and struggles with bureaucracy there are
all kinds of themes played on on this on
this canvas all right and the canvas
begins with you know a blank empty white
fabric there's nothing else there in a
sense and yet there's so much there
there's a process of painting that's
meaningful for the painter there's a
meaning that we perceive as being in the
image intrinsic to the image or arising
from the image that can mean something
for the viewer for the audience right
there's a social function and a cultural
function even a political function to
this to this canvas there's a lot more
real value here going on that cannot be
analyzed in terms of pain and cannot be
analyzed in terms of pleasure maybe none
of it is pleasure the actual process of
painting may not be enjoyable the actual
process of looking at this painting and
reflecting on the themes of war and
starvation and medical assistance and
boxing or whatever so this guy's mine
it may not be pleasant either maybe at
no stage in this is their pleasure and
yet we're talking about something mean
full and some of that belongs in a
completely separate category from these
questions of sharks and whales in the
ocean these questions of the life of the
lion on the plains these questions of
what's meaningful and meaningless at
human life whether or not it was a
mistake to be born or whether or not
it's a mistake to give birth to it
another child today I think we're
actually conflating several different
categories and what's going on here and
visibly for the the antenatal 'us
is actually a monotheistic salvific mode
of thinking the paradise of the
anti-natal list
is the moon it's the lifeless rocks on
the surface of Mars as surreal as that
may sound and they're saying compared to
that standard what we do here on earth
can never live up to it so why paint a
picture why study a language like
Chinese why do humanitarian work when it
can't compare to this paradise they're
holding up as an absurd comparison but
that comparison is utterly unreal and in
contrast to that the value of this
painting is actually something very real
even though we may think of the arts as
illusory a bonus Yin